Enter the Demon
By Brendan Boursiquot


        The moon laid a soft blanket of light across the town of Stillbright, though the darkness still reigned past its darkest hour; it was well after midnight. Slow steady squishes filled the silent town, thick boots trampling and dragging across the icy wet lawn, and each burst of mist that dissipated into the cold air from the grass, was greeted by fat breaths, white puffs tainting the night’s aura.
        Tim had finally reached his front door, shuffling through his pocket for his keychain, and singled out a key with white tape sloppily stuck around its shoulder. He jabbed the key at the keyhole and missed twice, pushing the door. Confused, he realized that the door was already opened. He checked behind both his shoulders and sighed.
        “Babe?” he said quietly, as if she was nearby, waiting for him. He proceeded in slowly, motioning for the lights while canvassing the house. Nothing… the power was out. 
In front of him and to his left, he could discern some shattered chairs and stray metal objects scattered around the floor in the kitchen. He paused. Each object glistened with the faint moonlight that crept through the windows, but the knife… the knife seemed to be shining at him. He could make out the cabinets as well, with their doors missing and their contents smashed or gone. He took his phone out his pocket while dialling 9-1-1, quickly looking at his phone before continuing his search. In front of him and to his right, as his eyes fully adjusted to the darkness, he saw broken toy cars and dolls with limbs missing, all spread across the stairs.
        “9-1-1, what’s your emergency,” the operator said, but the volume of her speech was drowned out by distance, as he left his phone to his side, staring vigorously at the toys on the stairs.
        “Hello?” the operator spoke, her sound being lost to his quiet dilemma once more.
        He heard a chuckle or some other distinguishable noise. He turned around swiftly and had to take an extra step back to prop himself so as not to fall. Black. He was peering off into the blank night through the empty doorway, and though faintly, he had finally heard:
        “If this is a‒”
        “No, no, hello? Sorry, I’d like to, uh… I think someone came into my house,” Tim said worriedly. There was a rattling up the stairs; he froze. “I- I think they’re still here,” he whispered. The operator had gave him certain instructions but he tuned her out as he gazed up the stairs and then again to the items on the steps. He hung up.
        Tim glanced at the toys once more and pounced on the first step; creak. The rattling stopped, so he hesitated. After a few moments the rattling started up again… creak. He took a second step, but waited to take a third to see if the rattling would stop again. It didn’t; it got louder. He utilized the intensified sound to quietly scurry up the stairs and take out his switchblade. It was coming from his room.
        He paced towards the room and held out his knife upon entering the doorway. His closet door was shaking back and forth. As he approached the closet he could hear a faint rumbling. Puzzled, he opened the door, stepping to the side as he pulled it, and took a big step to position himself in front of the open closet, leading with the knife. The closet was empty up top but he looked to the floor and saw a dead body. He leaped backwards, emitting a deep gasp, and tripped due to his awful footing. He held his hand to his mouth and panted intensely as he lied there on the floor. He began to crawl towards the closet and actually saw it: it was a pile of his clothes on the ground. He sighed in relief, and then laughed to himself.
        “Daddy?” a voice said from the hallway. He sprang up and ran to the door of his room. It was his son. He dropped to his knees and started to cry.
        “Yeah... I’m right here” he said, wiping tears from his eyes. Tim stuck out his arms for his son to run for a hug… but his son ran back into his room. Distraught and baffled, he got up from the floor and stood in the hallway, breathing heavily. His thoughts were scattered… he thought that perhaps he was buzzed. The light in his son's room turned on.
        “But the…” Tim muttered to himself, questioning whether he had tried to turn on the lights. He strolled towards his son’s room, turmoil in his eyes. He grabbed the frame of the door and crept inside the room, head first. He glimpsed at his son and stared. His son was full of bruises and scratches. Tim walked slowly towards his son somber and heart-broken. As Tim made his way fully under the light, his son began treading backwards.
        “What happened?” he asked tearing. His son only stepped back further. “Son, what…” he choked on his words, thinking about the possibilities of what had become of his family. “What happened… Who did this to you?” The son raised his hand, pointing at Tim’s face. He gave a look of confusion until his son’s lingering finger informed him. He turned around.