Odes, Brothers, and Angels
By Brendan Boursiquot


        The heavens were beginning to close, those grey cloudy doors starting to show face. The wind was picking up steam, too, drawing breath from the cold canvas above. Rain was coming.
        He knew the drizzling would turn to a shower, but despite the weather, he still wanted to meet here. I wanted to ask why, but he gave a look that cautioned against disturbance. It was quiet for a moment. We’d stare at each other for a while before he had looked away to his feet. He wanted to cry but couldn’t… I saw it in his face; his eyes were tensing up.
I couldn’t bear the silence, his pain was making me uneasy. I had to make him feel better.
“Remember how we used to play football in the street,” I said, finally getting his attention. He looked up cracking a half-smile and then proceeded to gaze into the ground as the rain started pour. I looked over with him; we were both looking. “There was that one time we threw the ball at Mrs. Robinson’s car and had to bail. We ran so far we ended up in another neighborhood. That’s when we met Tommy and everyone at Becker Street... Boy that Tommy had a mouth fresh out the womb.”
He chuckled. We began reflecting over all of Tommy’s wildest jokes and shenanigans. Even when we got to high school, if the situations he put us in wasn’t getting Mrs. Robinson and the rest of the Old Bones mad, it was making our girlfriends hate us from June to September. Tommy got us into a lot of trouble back in the day. 
But before long, he had spaced out again, pondering over the earth he stood over once more, and let his mouth linger open before speaking, water dripping from lip to lip. “You kept me solid man... All of us. And whenever we’d get busted for something you and Tommy would make everything lighter.” He couldn’t look at me when he spoke but we both felt the rush of sincerity. “Thanks Noah,” he sighed. He spoke as if I was bearing some of his pain; I didn’t know how this other side felt… so I didn’t speak, I just nodded my head, giving him a glimpse of my confirmation. He was welcomed.
It then began to get more humid the more we waited in silence, the heavy water dragging down our breath; the rain didn’t help. We used to come here every year, but it never got easier. I felt like the universe accumulated the silence we shared here, and spoke something much louder on our behalf. So we just stood there, panting and speaking, wet pants and jackets anchoring us down, until some moments passed and he proceeded to make his way. Before he took his third step, however, he had noticed the rose that was still in his hand. He looked down and saw blood dripping with the rain from his palm. Still, he held it tighter.
He walked back over to where I was and suspended his hand in the air until he was satisfied with the amount of crimson that had cleansed both the grass and the rain. In that moment, I saw a deity. Its as if he knew a fallen soul would be with him every time he shed blood, and like I bore witness, the world would too… so if not gods, who else do angels follow? I was wishing to experience this myself, but I just stood there, quietly worshiping what he had shown me today.
His day would start as usual: he brushed his teeth, washed his face, ate breakfast, rode the subway, and got greetings from a girl he fancied at work. But he didn’t follow this routine today by shuffling through his typical paperwork, pulling teeth from pencil pushers, and heading telephone calls; today he went to a school where he had to make a speech to the youth who looked like him, Tommy, and me. I didn’t know what he was going to do, but he invited me up on that stage with him. He gave a speech and amidst his words I could hear an ode to his brother. In front of the whole auditorium, we asserted ourselves.
Soon after there was a moment on stage where we both looked upon the faces of the crowd and felt a certain responsibility we hadn’t felt before. Perhaps, then, he had made the choice to come here… and I followed proudly.
He proceeded to lay the rose upon the ground and in his face I could see determination. I couldn’t figure out what it was that was said that made him so focused, but I wanted to assure him that I stand by Tommy too. He probably knew.
He then mouthed off something; things he thought were not known. But he walked off in the rain with words said, and we forcefully held our heads high. We strolled on for about thirty seconds and looked behind us. The weather had possibly gotten to the rose, but the rain couldn’t wear down the engraving from the stone yet… may we meet again, Noah Greene 1996-2014.