Rapper Is Shot to Death in Echo of Killing 6 Months Ago

Notorious B.I.G., a gangsta rap artist who turned his drug-dealing past on the streets of Brooklyn into a platinum-selling recording career, was killed here early this morning in an apparent drive-by shooting. He is the second big-name rapper to be slain in the last six months.

The victim, whose real name was Christopher G. Wallace, had left a crowded party and was sitting in a sport utility vehicle when a vehicle sped up and began spitting gunfire, witnesses said. A bystander rushed Mr. Wallace, 24, to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead, the police said.

Mr. Wallace was a fierce rival of Tupac Shakur, the 25-year-old rap star who was fatally shot in a drive-by attack six months ago. Mr. Shakur had accused Mr. Wallace of involvement in a 1994 robbery in which Mr. Shakur was shot and lost $40,000 in jewelry.

Mr. Wallace, who stood a hulking 6 feet 3 inches and weighed nearly 300 pounds, was also known as Biggie Smalls. He had burst onto the rap scene three years ago with his first album, ''Ready to Die,'' blending firsthand accounts of misdeeds some rappers only brag about with ambivalent expressions of fear and paranoia about sustaining his success.

Continue reading the main story
''I'm scared to death,'' he said in a 1994 interview in his mother's home in Brooklyn, where he had a pair of 9-millimeter guns under his mattress. ''Scared of getting my brains blown out.''

Kevin Kim, who saw the shooting, said Mr. Wallace had just attended a party at the Petersen Automotive Museum. The event, in the Wilshire district known as Miracle Mile, celebrated the 11th Annual Soul Train Music Awards, which were presented in South-Central Los Angeles on Friday.

Don Cornelius, the executive producer of ''Soul Train,'' the weekly television dance show, said the program had not sponsored the party.

The police said the shooting had occurred after the Fire Department had closed the party because the museum had been too crowded, and the guests had begun to disperse.

Mr. Wallace was sitting in a GMC Suburban in the museum's parking area, Mr. Kim said. ''Someone just rolled by and started shooting.''

Mr. Wallace's estranged wife, Faith Evans, a singer who had a child with Mr. Wallace, also saw the shooting.

Robert Payne, a security guard at a high-rise office building across the street, said, ''All of a sudden, I heard about five or six shots -- pow, pow, pow, pow, pow.''

Mr. Payne said some passengers in Mr. Wallace's vehicle, which had been moving erratically before the shooting, had jumped out and then back in before they sped away.

Detectives at the Wilshire Boulevard station declined to offer any details beyond the sketchy account of the shooting released by police headquarters. But speculation inevitably centered on the rivalry between Mr. Wallace and his producer and protector, Sean (Puffy) Combs of Bad Boy Entertainment, and Mr. Shakur and his producer, Marion (Suge) Knight, the head of Death Row Records.

Mr. Wallace's new double album ''Life After Death'' is to be released March 25; the car in which he was killed had a sticker that said, ''Think B.I.G. March 25.'' An advertisement for the album in the April issue of Vibe magazine features a somber Mr. Wallace in a frock coat and brimmed hat, standing beside an image of his own tombstone.

Mr. Shakur, who also grew up in New York City but came to prominence on the West Coast, where he later lived, had long accused Mr. Wallace of stealing his style. He also said Mr. Wallace was involved in the 1994 robbery, in a recording studio lobby in Manhattan. Mr. Wallace, a dominant figure in East Coast rap, was conspicuously absent from a well-publicized ''rap summit'' in Harlem after Mr. Shakur's slaying.

Mr. Knight, who got into a fight hours before Mr. Shakur was shot in the vehicle Mr. Knight was driving, was sentenced to nine years in prison on Feb. 28 for violating a 1995 probation stemming from past assaults. The judge ruled that he had violated probation by getting into the fight at the MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas on Sept. 7.

Mr. Wallace, too, had a criminal record. Last summer, he was arrested at his home in Teaneck, N.J., on drug and weapons charges. A year ago, he was charged with assault after chasing two autograph seekers outside the Palladium nightclub in Manhattan and smashing the windows of their cab with a baseball bat. At age 17, he was arrested on a cocaine-dealing charge in North Carolina and spent nine months in jail while waiting to post bail.

In the new documentary on hip-hop culture, ''Rhyme and Reason,'' Mr. Wallace reflected on his feeling that when he had stopped dealing drugs and become a star, the adulation of his fans was ''fake love.''

''Me hustling and selling drugs, it schooled me to the streets a lot,'' he said in the film. ''I learned a lot. You know what I'm saying?

''Selling drugs forever is something you can't do. You cannot do that. You will eventually die or go to jail.''

In Bedford-Stuyvesant, where Mr. Wallace and his friends once dealt drugs out of a garbage can in front of a fried-chicken place on Fulton Street, his neighborhood friends and fans did not seem surprised that Mr. Wallace had died in a hail of bullets.

''When you live by the gun, you die by the gun,'' said Shon Dale, 18, who lives in the neighborhood and owns all of Notorious B.I.G.'s music.

Along the tree-lined, working-class block where Mr. Wallace grew up, his former neighbors said they were proud of the success of a hometown boy. Yet many added that they were tired of the rivalry between the country's most popular gangsta rappers.

Mr. Dale said, ''There should have been no beef between him and Tupac,'' he said. ''There should have been peace.''