THE N.B.A. FINALS; A Steal, a Shot and One More Crown

At some point, his skills will have to recede. He will not hit the last-second shot or drive the lane with fire and flair. He will be more than good, but less than great. He will not be able to put all the magic together in one unreal sequence -- the way he did tonight, seizing another world title in 37.1 scintillating seconds at the age of 35.

In an encore that is not likely to be repeated -- but who can tell anymore? -- Michael Jordan stole the Utah Jazz's soul while adding the most incredible flourish yet to his legend.

He made an 18-foot jump shot from the top of the key with 5.2 seconds left, sending the Chicago Bulls to their sixth National Basketball Association title in eight seasons with a pulsating 87-86 victory in Game 6 of the finals. The shot came after he had stolen the ball from Karl Malone along the baseline with 18.9 seconds remaining and Utah ahead by 1 point.

He had already made a driving layup with his team trailing by 3 points with 37.1 seconds left. He scored the Bulls' last 8 points as they won the N.B.A. championship by four games to two.

Continue reading the main story
After Jordan's final basket, John Stockton's 3-pointer just before the buzzer was off target, ending this wild game.

''When I got the ball, I looked up and saw 18.5 seconds left,'' Jordan said, describing the play that led to his last shot. ''And I felt like we couldn't call a timeout; it gives the defense an opportunity to set up. It was a do-or-die situation. I let the time tick to where I had the court right where I wanted it.

''Great look. And it went in.''

Stockton had made a 3-pointer to send the fanatical crowd into a frenzy with 41.9 seconds remaining, seemingly all but sealing a Game 7 here on Wednesday.

Never had Jordan's throne seemed so shaky, his dynasty so vulnerable.

And then he went to work. He could have been starring in a video game, or in a Hollywood fantasy -- or both -- when he drove the lane and scored almost uncontested. He had missed five straight shots from the perimeter before then, and had been lucky to get to the free throw line on two out-of-control drives.

He stole the game from Utah. He stole the season. He tamed the rowdiest crowd in the league. And if he walked out of the dead-quiet Delta Center tonight and never came back to basketball, he could retire for the second time knowing he went out with unmatched brilliance. To go with his sixth championship trophy, he also won his sixth award as most valuable player of the finals.

''I think it's the best performance ever by Michael Jordan at a critical moment in a critical series,'' Bulls Coach Phil Jackson said as he puffed on a cigar after the game. ''No one has ever done it better.''

Jordan scored 45 points in 44 minutes, taking 35 shots because he had to. His teammate Scottie Pippen was suffering from back spasms.

Toni Kukoc finished with 15 points, and Pippen played as well as he could in 26 minutes. Malone finished with 31 points and 11 rebounds, working hard for every shot and trying his best to force a decisive seventh game.

Jeff Hornacek added 17 points for Utah, and Stockton was all over the floor, contributing 10 points and 5 assists.

But the night, as usual at this time of year, belonged to Jordan. With the Bulls trailing by 49-45 at halftime and by 66-61 after three quarters, he began to pace himself, almost as if he knew how the ending would play out.

The sequence that truly shifted the momentum involved Jordan's sneaking along the baseline like a blitzing linebacker about to blindside a quarterback. Malone had just received the ball in the post with less than 20 seconds remaining and the Jazz ahead. Suddenly, Jordan swooped in, and the ball was no longer Utah's.

''Karl never saw me coming, and I was able to knock the ball away,'' he said.

Pippen cried as he began embracing Jordan along with other Bulls teammates at midcourt, after Stockton's shot had been tipped out to the perimeter and the clock had sounded. It may have been the thought of this Bulls team possibly not returning that got to him -- along with Jordan, Pippen and Dennis Rodman, the Bulls have four other free agents -- or it may just have been watching the greatest player ever performing another on-court miracle.

But as they raised their sixth championship trophy high into the air, the Bulls may have been celebrating their perseverance as much as their dominance. Less than 48 hours after losing their home-court advantage with a Game 5 loss at the United Center, they came out and proved their merit by winning a third straight championship for the second time in the decade.

''I saw the moment, and I took advantage of the moment,'' Jordan said. ''I never doubted myself. I knew we had an opportunity to win this game.''

Eight years ago, a sky-walking shooting guard emerged from the shadows of Larry Bird and Magic Johnson, grabbed the N.B.A.'s torch and gracefully elevated toward the rim. Eight years later, he refuses to come down.

The Bulls' two-year title gap in 1994 and 1995 covered Jordan's year-and-a-half experiment with baseball. Tonight, he looked as strong and agile as he did the night in 1991 when he performed a wondrous act of in-air artistry and produced an indelible N.B.A. finals image, rising for a dunk with his right hand before switching to his left for a layup at the last possible moment. He hit the same kind of shot in Game 1 a year ago against the Jazz in Chicago, putting the defender Bryon Russell on his heels until he had enough room to release the ball -- just as he did tonight.

''He made a couple of big plays right down the stretch,'' Stockton said. ''Mark another one in the books for him.''

Added Jackson, ''I don't know if anybody could quite write a dramatic scenario like that one.''

After the Champagne had been sprayed and the cigars lit, Jordan was asked more about his future than the game.

''Hopefully I've put enough memories out there for everybody to at least have some thoughts about what Michael Jordan did in his 13 or 14 years or whatever it takes, and put some comparisons up there for kids to follow and compare themselves to,'' he said. ''I have another life and I know I have to get to it at some place and time.''

Watching the televised replays of his astonishing finish, the general feeling among observers after tonight was: what's the rush?