Lakers Sweep Nets for Title

EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., June 12 — Shaquille O'Neal smiled and basked in his own untouchable sphere, accepting high-fives in the middle of his court — the N.B.A. finals. His sidekick, Kobe Bryant, slipped over to Nets Coach Byron Scott and hugged him.

When the final buzzer sounded on the season, the rest of the Los Angeles Lakers followed their indomitable leaders onto the Continental Arena floor, rejoicing in quiet congratulation for winning a third consecutive world championship.

By seizing a 113-107 victory tonight over the Nets, the Lakers became only the fifth team in N.B.A. history to win three consecutive championships and only the seventh team to sweep the finals four games to none.

"That was a sweet victory for us," said Lakers Coach Phil Jackson, who tied Red Auerbach's record for the most titles as a head coach, nine. "These are men of action, that's what's wonderful."

While the Lakers were spraying champagne in their locker room, the Nets had the sour taste of frustration in theirs. Kenyon Martin, the emotional leader of the team who scored a career-high 35 points, even suggested that some of his teammates did not show up tonight and point guard Jason Kidd backed him up.

But in the end, all of the Nets could not stop O'Neal, who had 34 points, 10 rebounds and 4 assists. O'Neal, the Lakers' center, was named the most valuable player of the finals for the third consecutive time. Only Michael Jordan had accomplished that — on two separate occasions.

O'Neal, a 7-1 foot, 350-pounder, had also swept three records for a four-game finals — scoring 145 points and hitting 45 free throws in 68 attempts.

Against the overmatched Nets, who were making their first N.B.A. finals appearance, the Lakers became the first team to win three championships in only 15 games, taking each title one game faster than the last.

"This one is making our stamp as one of the great teams of all time," said Bryant, who had 25 points, 8 assists and 6 rebounds.

But with 1 minute 24 seconds left, even Martin gave way to tears, drying them in a towel and knowing that the Nets' remarkable season was drawing to a close.

After the game, Martin surprisingly criticized his teammates, and Kidd agreed. "Some guys don't have it in them," Martin said.

But in the end, the Nets could not stop O'Neal and could only watch as Bryant squelched them in the final quarter.

Tonight, as much as the Nets tried, was no different from any of the first three games.

"Two guys don't beat the Lakers," said Kidd, who had 13 points and 12 assists. "We thought we could win one game; that would give us some confidence. But the big thing is we had a great season. Nobody had picked us to be in this position, for us to get this far with the talent we had with the guys we had."

The Nets realized they were undermanned against O'Neal and Bryant, as well as tradition.

The Lakers won their 14th title, including five when they were the Minneapolis Lakers. And the Nets walked away not quite empty-handed, but with a hollow feeling nonetheless.

They had held a 3-point lead in the fourth quarter until Bryant and O'Neal and Derek Fisher wrested it from them, taking an 8-0 run all the way to the title.

Since Game 4 of the Western Conference finals against Sacramento, when Robert Horry hit the game-winning 3-pointer at the buzzer, the Lakers seemed to become a different team. Since coming back to win the final two games of that series, they seemed motivated to reach the one destination they had sought since the beginning of the season.

With 44.2 seconds left and the Lakers holding a 109-103 lead with Bryant on the line, Nets coach Byron Scott conceded defeat. He put in his reserves and waited for the celebration on his home court.

For the Lakers, they never stopped soaring. "It went by fast," said Bryant. "It's an unbelievable feeling to have right now."

"It says we are a great team, everybody stuck to the role, everybody stuck to the script, even when times were so-called hard," O'Neal said.

"The first one, it's a novelty and it feels good," Bryant said of winning the title. "The first one will always be the best one. The second one, adversity that we went through throughout the course of the year made that one special. We proved that we belonged.

"This one, it's kind of making us step up as one of the great teams."

The Lakers were leading, 84-80, to begin the fourth quarter when Kidd and Martin brought the Nets back with a 7-0 run. That, coupled with the 4 points to end the third quarter, gave the Nets an 87-84 lead with 10:05 to play when Martin hit the first of two free throws.

By Bryant, who had shot just 3 of 11, hit a 3-pointer to tie the score. Brian Shaw hit a jumper to give the Lakers an 89-87 lead and after Martin answered with a jumper, Devean George made a 3-pointer to give the Lakers a 92-89 lead. That would ignite a 13-4 run that spelled doom for the Nets.

A play that symbolized the Nets' futility in this series came with 5:42 to play when Martin and O'Neal wrestled for the ball. The Lakers won the jump ball and Fisher hit a 22-footer from the left corner for a 97-93 lead while the rookie Jason Collins fought O'Neal for position under the basket.

O'Neal toppled Collins to the court, and Collins was whistled for the foul. O'Neal made the free throw to give the Lakers a 98-93 lead.

When Bryant hit a jumper to give the Lakers a 100-93 lead with 5 minutes to play, the Nets were finished.

"I thought that we gave them too much respect in the first two games," Scott said. "You can't show them that type of respect, you have to go after them."

Martin felt that he was one of the only ones doing that. "Look at the stat sheet," Martin said.

Keith Van Horn shot just 3 of 7 for 7 points and Kerry Kittles was just 4 of 10 with 11 points. Martin made 15 of his 28 field- goal attempts to go with his 35 points, and Lucious Harris scored 22 points off the bench.

Martin had scored 17 points to O'Neal's 12 in the first quarter, setting the pace for a Nets' 34-27 lead.

He scored 13 points in the fourth quarter, but Bryant scored 11 and O'Neal scored 6, including making four of five free throws in the final quarter when the Lakers' will was just too much.

"You can pick your poison," Kidd said. "You're going to watch Shaq dunk the ball all night or you're going to hope that their outside shooters don't make them."

The Lakers did, hitting 11 of 19 3-pointers.

O'Neal inside. Bryant outside. The Nets had no answers. The Lakers were crowned.